When I chose Diana Ross,
somehow this line
suddenly came to mind,
“Do you know
where you’re going to?”
And immediately,
I thought of the line
having meaning to a character
who was lost in life
Somehow, that’s the first song
that came into place
which is why I wanted Diana Ross.
During the rehearsals,
Soxie, the director,
helped to complete the play.
I only knew “I’m Coming Out”
should be there.
But for example, songs like
“Heart, Don’t Change My Mind,”
but Soxie was going for “Muscles”
because he knew
Diana Ross’s songs better.
And from there, the scenes
somehow started falling into places.
which I intended
to be the foundation,
and what would thread
the storytelling,
So the structure was partly
defined by the songs of Diana Ross.
In a way, those became
the scene titles,
something like that.
- Did you intend
to write it at full-length?
Yes, I wrote it at full-length.
Well, it was a twin bill.
“Damas de Noche”,
if I’m not mistaken, was a one act play.
This one,
I guess, I just couldn’t stop writing
that’s why it developed so much.
It was rich with experiences.
From the seminarists
to the corporate world
in the last part, right?
Since we have friends from the bank,
they tell us how it should be.
At that time,
coming out could affect
your career ladder,
So, that’s what I got
from synthesizing
the experiences from that conclave.
The flow of the story
are like snapshots
of the different phases in his life
but somehow,
it was all about
talking about
either accepting
or rejecting one's self.
So you’ll notice
that it differs each phase.
At first,
he was defended.
Second, he rejected it.
Third,
he failed rejecting it.
So he needed the–
probably because of the alcohol.
He gave in.
Fourth,
at the cusp of the marriage,
he was caught as consequence
to giving in to the desire.
The fifth
is acceptance,
finally.
There was that aspect
if you noticed it.
Of course, it wasn’t that clear yet
when I was writing it.
So, I had a lot of luck
at that time.
But it was also intuitive,
in deciding what happened
at which part of the character’s life.
In the course of that also,
while writing,
I had to do it chronologically
because I didn’t know how to do
one scene ahead of the last.
I had to do it chonologically
so I could only follow
his life as I created it.
- Why did you think of using
pictures as transitions?
Yes, my inspiration
came from photographs.
But when it was produced,
Soxie did it differently.
He dramatized it.
They’d enter and exit with costumes.
And afterwards, they'd do
a quick costume change
and when they come back,
it’s a different one.
They improvised.
So they had to do it all
while singing
and the rest would usher in.
So that on the latter part
of “I’m Coming Out”,
they’re dancing already.
That was their curtain call.
- Did you include
the director’s approach
in your script?
No, I didn’t include it.
- So, you disagree with it?
No, it’s not that I disagree.
It’s just that,
I wasn’t able to record–
to document those scenes.
Something like that.
The slides weren’t improvised
to the letter, either.
So when I signed this up
for Palanca, I told myself,
My god! Instead of going through
it again, I thought this would do.
It’s just transitions anyway.
The main point was to make Diana
look like she’s having a concert.
Somehow, lip-syncing
to the gestures is very gay
because Diana was a gay icon.
Plus, the actual act
of impersonation
is a fabulously gay
event.
Something like that.
- Is this what started
the gay plays of 1991?
No, this wasn’t the start.
The first was Wilfrido Ma. Guerrero.
I guess, one of the first gay plays ever
written was
Wilfrido Ma.Guerrero’s
“The Clash of Cymbals”.
It’s also about
the difficulty of coming out.
The next one’s Orlando Nadres.
- “Hanggang Dito…”
His “Hanggang Dito na Lamang...”
This one’s more celebratory
because he was accepted.
Orlando’s “Hanggang Dito…”
was unlike any other.
He fell in love with a straight guy
and it became something.
It showed that it’s okay
to have a gay relationship.
The evolution is quite slow.
-Yes!
The consciousness but…
- It's not the same today?
What do you mean?
- There are a lot of plays like it.
There are a lot.
I came–after this,
my next play
was “Ralph and Claudia”
which is about a transgender.
However, it wasn’t well-accepted
even by the gay community.
In fact,
feminists understood it more.
Well, that’s another story,
but anyway this was my process.
- Is there any other way
you would restructure this?
If it was me?
- If given the chance.
If it was me, I wouldn’t know
because it was meant
for Diana Ross’ songs.
It’s either you change the songs
to fix them the way you want
or you could create
different scenes
if you want to update it.
- Like use Beyonce’s songs.
- Did anyone respond to the play?
What?
- Any responses to it?
To this?
There were none.
There weren't any.
At the same time,
the sensibilities are different nowadays.
The difficulties
in coming out have changed.
I’m sure that some people still struggle,
but not to the tune of Diana Ross.
But at the same time–
- Ariana Grande.
What else?
May?
- Which was formed first?
The songs or the scenes?
The scenes.
One inspiration was Diana Ross,
that’s why the title came first in a way,
although it was incomplete.
One song was “Do You Know”.
I knew I wanted to use it
as inspiration for a scene.
Something like that.
So, the scene was formed.
and the second scene was perfect.
After that, I put
“Ain’t No Mountain High Enough”.
Those were the early days of Diana Ross.
They were still the Supremes.
In the eyes of young Andy,
early Diana Ross was just right.
That’s the next thing
that came along.
I don’t know much
about “Muscles”.
Soxie was the one
who introduced it
and “Heart, Don’t Change My Mind”.
I was actually thinking
about Billie Holiday at that time
because she did
“Lady Sings the Blues”.
Soxie wasn’t up for it
and thought we should use
“Good Morning Heartache”
for the gunshot scene.
That's when she sang
Billie Holiday.
“I’m Coming Out” came after.
So I think there were two songs
where I didn’t know what to put.
- Diana Ross
didn't know, either?
No.
- Was she a gay icon here?
Yes, oh my god!
-'Til now?
People don't know her anymore?
- But RuPaul, right?
RuPaul re-introduced her.
-Yes, he re-introduced it
to the new generation.
Diana and Barang
were the gay icons.
Barbara Streisand.
Every gay person
was dying to impersonate her.
- Didn't the first drag queens
have that Diana Ross look?
Yeah, that look.
-So, it was okay?
I mean, when he used it?
I’m not so sure
if we remake it,
especially today.
At that time,
you could get away with it.
It wasn’t an issue
because it was lip-synced.
It was a gay bar fare.
It was one of the most commonly used…
- In terms of writing,
when interviewing about
the politics of gays,
was it a conscious thing…?
Because Orlando’s character
was falling in love with a straight guy.
The gay character here seems to have
more consciousness about other gays.
Was there a conscious effort
to create this kind of character?
Yes, in the sense that
it was also one
of the issues that came out
during the conclave discussions.
That it doesn’t have to be…
because in most sob stories
you fall in love with a person
who doesn’t share
the same gender preference.
You end up having to
provide for that person
just to complete the relationship.
But actually, there’s that option
to be in a relationship
with fellow gays
Or those who share
the same preference,
so it’s mutual in a way.
But, it’s still a coming out play
so it’s not so different from…
But that’s the thing,
if you count the years
it seemed like forever
before plays like this
and this is how it’s advanced
in terms of output
of the story.
- It’s like a snapshot of how it was
back in the early 90s.
Kind of, yes.
Or I think, it was more of a synthesis
of what we have discussed
together.
I guess a lot of the people
who watched the show
were affected.
In fact, there was a full spread
on a writer who came out
using his piece
because of the play.
So I said, okay, go!
Something like that.
So, that’s how I wrote the play.
Did I make a scenario?
I did.
I remember having done a scenario
just to find out
what each scene contained.
It wasn’t a very detailed scenario.
Primarily because I was partly drawing
from my personal experience.
So more or less,
the scene was clear to me.
How the mommy and the daddy
would go about the scene.
What they'd say–
The scenes from seminary
were largely from research.
Then I imagined
what would happen to...
The repartee, for example.
Some of them came from me,
like the exorcism part.
Plus, I can clearly remember
in my program notes
it was my coming out.
I went and declared
that this was mine
because I wasn’t fully “out” at that time.
When we held the preview,
I realized I had to tweak some parts.
There was a part where Susan said,
“I’m giving this back to you
since it’s a factory defect.”
Is it still there?
- Not anymore.
We removed it because of the reaction
of the first preview audience.
Is she seriously
going to say “factory defect”?
The impact was huge.
Apparently, the remark
had such a huge effect,
that the impact might backfire
instead of portraying it
as something indecent.
It might reinforce
that kind of thinking
and be used
as an insult to children.
So we removed it.
- So you can’t say that it was just part
of Susan’s character in defense?
The thing is,
these terms could be taken out
of context outside the theater.
- Was there a time when you
came across a book or a script
that inspired you to use in this script?
- Like say, in projecting lines,
dialogue, or something.
For this play?
- Yeah.
- Or based on what you read before.
Was there a conscious…?
For this play,
I think there was none.
- But, what triggered this is the…
The discussion.
That’s where I got
all the experiences.
- So it was with the intention
of creating a play from experiences.
There were a lot of discussions.
We even went for a retreat,
an overnight thing,
sometimes, swimming.
After we had that,
some people started crying
and telling their stories.
Then we had drinks,
then a party later on.
But during those discussions,
I wasn’t thinking
about the play yet.
After that, since most of us
were from PETA,
we decided to create a play.
It fell into my lap then,
I started getting stories.
Even the...
Specifically, for this scene we read
about the life in the seminary.
The old seminarians shared
quite a lot of stories,
even quoting Virgil.
"The Aeneid".
Those were the first lines:
“Arma virumque cano”
which means
“I sing of arms and men”.
Something like that.
He told us that they
were studying that in Latin.
Since the translation
was “I sing of arms and men”,
I thought that it was perfect
to make a new definition,
So that's what I did.
Even the manuallia
where they have to do manual labor.
They had to clean the bathroom,
scrub the floor.
Those were part of the interviews.
It was an attempt
to somehow synthesize
what happened
during the discussions.
- Aside from the pictures,
was the rest of it
untouched by Direk Soxie?
Yes, that was it.
I guess in sharing that,
plays go through
different journeys.
It doesn’t have to go
through this journey.
But, this journey came
from personal and other experiences.
But still, the craft would come in
because it would demand
how you’d elevate it
to the level of theatricality.
And with theatricality
comes the fictionalizing.
Focusing on what you
really want to show and so on.
And not just replicating
what happened in reality
because it doesn’t mean anything
in making and writing
for theatre or even for film.
Beginning writers would always say,
“Because it happened.”
So what?
If it won’t help you
to become more effective
in showing what you really want to say,
about this particular story
or inside this particular story,
then you can tweak it.
That’s where you play “God”,
in that sense.
Like I said before,
even biographies
like the life of Winston Churchill
and Emilio Aguinaldo.
To the certain extent,
the mere fact that you’re editing those,
you’re cutting unnecessary
and inappropriate things.
You’re creating a new image
for Emilio Aguinaldo.
That’s why El Presidente’s
Emilio Aguinaldo
is different from Heneral Luna’s.
But both will claim
that they came from historical sources.
See? You can demonize him
and make him an angel.
Both are not Emilio Aguinaldo.
They are characters.
Even Tony Kushner’s
Abraham Lincoln.
That’s why a historian
will always get aggravated
and tell you
those aren't accurate.
A film or a play
is not really after accuracy per se,
as long as you
don’t distort the basic facts.
- In terms of Diana’s character,
- Did you create rules
on what she knows here–
On what she...?
- She knows
or doesn’t know?
- Because it’s like
she’s Andy’s consciousness.
- Her gay consciousness.
But in this scene,
Andy knows things
that Diana doesn’t.
that Diana doesn’t?
-Yes, like when they
were talking about what happened.
- About why Father Bobby got mad.
- Diana knows nothing
about what Andy knows.
No, she knows.
She was there.
- It’s like she was saying
that it wasn’t right.
- It was more her reaction
rather than I don’t know that.
- She's doing more of a reaction.
There was never a scene
where Diana seemed ignorant
about things that happened.
Although she mentioned
“I was suspended”.
It was just her way
of saying things,
it's not really because
she doesn’t know,
or she's not around.
- It’s like she’s already processing…
Because she’s already nervous
even before she's told.
- I was just thinking that we have
imaginary characters
if we follow rules.
Well, you’ll dictate
the rules you’ll follow
As long as you
don't break it yourself
then it's fine.
She’s like Andy’s consciousness,
when he’s more or less
excited or stressed,
that’s where it comes out.
“I thought you were calling me.”
“I didn’t call you.”
But actually, a certain desire
or a certain context triggers that.
- I was thinking,
like for example…
- I’m conjuring a ghost
or a dead person to
talk to the character.
- If it’s an imagined being,
- I’m thinking about
what the being should know
about the character,
about the person.
Usually, if it’s an imagined being,
the character itself imagined it.
- Like when Agapito Flores appears
but it turns out it's not
actually Agapito Flores.
- How the character
sees Agapito Flores.
- A projection.
- So would Agapito Flores
know my life?
- It's your choice.
- I mean with the way
I'd converse with that being.
Possibly, yes.
But that concern
could actually be irrelevant,
because what you’re really doing,
especially if he’s imagined,
is talking to yourself.
Right?
So, I guess the “self”
is aware of what’s happening.
But for you to be able to put it
in a dramatic situation,
You’re creating another
persona of Agapito Flores.
to have a conversation
and it’s also your way
of telling the audience
what’s happening
or what they need to know.
Because if they
both know about everything,
why would they talk about it?
- Agapito could know about
the facts about that character,
but not what
that character feels right now.
Could be.
Or why am I conjured now?
Or what do you need?
It could be like that.
So we’d be able to say,
Or it could also be
the same with Charles Dickens.
It suddenly appeared.
Because you need
to be given a lesson.
"A Christmas Carol", remember?
That’s why Marley’s ghost came.
At that point, the ghost
knew more than him.
“I came here to warn you.”
Something like that.
It could be either way,
any way you want.
Well, it usually only happens
to emphasize the struggle.
For example, here,
I created Diana Ross
to clear her struggle
because firstly it would be corny
to see her talking to herself.
He’s gay, but singing
without a song, that’s weird.
Something like that
It’s not fab.
At least, this one
gives robotic vibes.
with extravagant hair.
Every time he enters the frame,
Melvin Lee wears a different costume.
And on “Muscles”,
he's wearing a tanga.
Jackie Abott even lifted him
with only a towel on his waist.
- Fantasy.
- Do you have pictures of those?
Sadly, there was no picture of that.
It really depends
on the purpose of the role
of the imagined being.
“Alright!”
Ate V once said.